Annotation scripts guide (#3)
ome/omero-guide-scripts: docs/walkthrough.rst

error in this case.

All from selected
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The fourth option is to apply the scripts to all of the selected objects and the children  \
objects. Selecting a Project and using the option **<all (from selected)>** with result in \
applying the scripts to the selected project, to the linked datasets and the linked images \
bellow. Note that this option does not exist for the import of annotation from csv.

Exporting annotations
---------------------

Exporting annotations creates a .csv file with headers compatible with the import script. \
It can be used for:

* Export key-value pairs (along with data like namespaces and tags) for modification or \
  transferring annotations between groups.
* Export a list of objects with their names and IDs (and excluding key-value pairs by \
  specifying an unused namespace).

.. figure:: images/annotation_04_export_output.png

   *Exported .csv with only the object ID and name*
..

Importing annotations
---------------------

Starting from the file we exported as explained in the previous section, \
we proceed to edit it within a spreadsheet editor, adding more columns to the csv, \

> including a row specifying the namespace to assign for each key:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also insert a row on the top of .csv to specify the namespace for each key:
```

Reviewer: (too much info in one sentence)

===========
Walkthrough
===========

The aim of the four Annotation scripts is to provide a way to edit \
Key-Value pairs (MapAnnotations) and Tags (TagAnnotations) by batch:

* Import Key-Value pairs and Tags as Annotations from a .csv file
* Export Key-Value pairs and Tags to a .csv file
* Delete Key-Value pairs
* Convert the namespaces of Key-Value pairs

> Following this walkthrough, we hope to give you an understanding of \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This walkthrough should give you an understanding of \
```

> the four scripts that will help you to manipulate your annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the scripts and help you to manage your annotations.
```

Object selection with the scripts
---------------------------------

The object selection logic is the same for all four scripts. In OMERO there are \
two distinct hierarchies:

* **Projects** → **Datasets** → **Images**
* **Screens** → **Plates** → (**Wells** or **Acquisition/Run**) → **Images**

> More details about selecting High-Content-Screening are given in another \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More details about selecting High-Content-Screening are given \
```

> section (see :doc:`Selecting High-Content-Screening </extended_description>`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
elsewhere (see :doc:`Selecting High-Content-Screening </extended_description>`).
```

> To select which objects to manipulate by batch, the scripts offer four distinct ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scripts offer 4 ways of selecting the objects to work with.
```

Direct selection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The first is to simply select the all the desired objects. Opening the script \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simply select the all the desired objects. Opening the script \
```

after selecting the object will prefill the script parameters with the right \
object type and IDs:

.. figure:: images/annotation_01_selecting_all_autofill.png

   *Selection of multiple datasets and the auto-filled Export to CSV script.*
..

For the direct selection, leave the Target Data Type as "*<selected>*" \
(in this example, choosing **Dataset** would also work).

Children selection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Instead of selecting the objects one by one, we can select the parent object \

> and set the "*Target Data Type*" to the type of the children objects \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and indicate in the "*Target Data Type*" the children objects \
```

we want to select.

.. figure:: images/annotation_02_selecting_parentchild_autofill.png

   *Selection of all the images of a project and the auto-filled Export to CSV script.*
..

> In this example, we would select all the **Images** found under the **Project:701**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, all the **Images** found under the **Project:701** are selected.
```

Tag selection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The third option is to select from a tag all the objects of a given type \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the Tags to select the images or other objects you want to work with.  \ 
```

> (do not confiuse with the option of exporting tags). This grants additional  \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do not confiuse this option with the exporting of tags also provided by the scripts. The usage of tags  \
```

> flexibility, either to select objects attached to different projects \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for object selection grants additional flexibility. You can for example select objects \
attached to different projects or belonging to different owners. \
```

> or different owners, or to have a finer control over \

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> which objects to process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

.. figure:: images/annotation_03_selecting_tags.png

   *Selection of a subset of datasets from a tag and the auto-filled Export to CSV script.*
..

> The selection works in the same way as for the children selection. Note \

Reviewer: Which is which way ? Be sure, I forgot it already from reading the children selection paragraph.

Author: changed to describe the example in the picture above

that choosing "*<selected>*" for "*Target Data Type*" will result in an \

> error in this case.

Reviewer: Indeed it does. I found it the hard way. Yet again, after the users found it in another case during the workshop last week. (note, they really appreciated the power of these scripts in general.) In many cases, even in the first case above, it would make much more sense to pass by default "Image" as the Target Data Type -> this is what the user will want in vast majority of cases.

Author: I did the `<selected>` as default to give it the "what you select is what you get" behavior. 
-> I select dataset & click export right away, I get dataset annotations
-> I select images & click export right away, I get image annotations

I would also prefer not to change it because images are the last place I want to put annotations: I prioritize annotations on datasets or wells to avoid duplicating the same MapAnn on all images inside. 
This also comes from how I organize experiments: 
one sample/replicate -> one dataset. (always true for high-content-screening: one well -> one sample/replicate)

Reviewer: > I did the `<selected>` as default to give it the "what you select is what you get" behavior.
> -> I select dataset & click export right away, I get dataset annotations
> -> I select images & click export right away, I get image annotations

sure, but as my comment indicates, one line in your list above is missing (that one which does not work so well) == ``-> I select Tag & click export right away and get an error`` - am I getting it right ? If yes, what is the reason to let me crash on a default Tag workflow ?
In the meantime, I understood your tactics on the 2 points you are listing and I can appreciate the logic there.

> how I organize experiments:

But the script is for general usership of OMERO ? Not for you solely ? :)

Author: >  I select Tag & click export right away and get an error

sorry I forgot to answer to that. That's indeed a shortcoming of my favorite default. And I don't have a way to change it in the UI to "Image" when the script is started from a tag. Maybe we have ways to address this later on (after merging the PR):
* implement the export of annotation on tags (and thus the list of tags and their IDs)
* have user preference in OMERO.web
* use caching to load in the UI the previous choices ?

> But the script is for general usership of OMERO ? Not for you solely ? :)

100% true, but for my defense, I also have users following my recommendation. That's also what I teach during my trainings. I guess you could call it the "Tom/Düsseldorf/GerBi annotation school" ;)

Reviewer: - ``implement the export of annotation on tags (and thus the list of tags and their IDs)`` would be my preferred option

- All kudos for the Tom/.../GerBI annotation school way of thinking. But then, what is the way to achieve the diversity of annotations within images of the same Dataset ? Surely the annotations on Images have strong use-case ?

All from selected
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The fourth option is to apply the scripts to all of the selected objects and the children  \

> objects. Selecting a Project and using the option **<all (from selected)>** with result in \

Reviewer: was the ``all (from selected)`` option applied in one of the more recent commits ? I cannot find it in the version on my server which I uploaded in May 2024.

Author: yes, <all (from selected)> is a recent change. That came from the comment on image.sc you pointed me to:

https://github.com/ome/omero-scripts/pull/216#issuecomment-2429940980

applying the scripts to the selected project, to the linked datasets and the linked images \

> bellow. Note that this option does not exist for the import of annotation from csv.

Reviewer: Yes, that was the point of bother also during the workshop. 
The problem was not so much that we did not select the target during Import correctly, but, rather, that the error/warning was not very telling/suggestive. There was definitely no hint about the necessity to select a different target. Note, during the workshop we did nto have the ``All from selected`` option available at all, but I am just thinking ahead here. It means that even with that option, if I have my annotations on images, I am not in a favorable situation. 

Interestingly, all valuable annotations in KVP form are on Images in the whole of IDR for example, i.e. having the Images annotated as opposed to Datasets or Projects is not an obsolete/bemusing idea imho.

Exporting annotations
---------------------

Exporting annotations will generate a .csv file with the header names \

> expected by the import .csv script. This has two use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expected by the import .csv script. This has two use:
```

Sorry, cannot suggest something reasonable. Please explain what ``This`` is in your sentence. ``...has two use..`` is certainly not correct English.

Author: Changed to:
`Exporting annotations creates a .csv file with headers compatible with the import script. It can be used for:`

* export existing key-value pairs (along other things like namespace or tags).
  This can be useful to modify them before re-import, or to transfer annotations
  across groups.
* export a list of objects with their name and ID.

.. figure:: images/annotation_04_export_output.png

   *Exported .csv with only the object ID and name*
..

>   Tip: If you have Key-Value pairs attached to your objects that you do not \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Tip: To omit some Key-Value pairs during export \
```

>   wish to export (to create a template like shown above), specify a not-in-use \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
, specify an unused \
```

Reviewer: Genuinely no idea what ``to create a template...`` means. Maybe you mean to export just for the sake of having a CSV with IDs and image names ? Fair enough and useful, but needs a separate sentence - not a trivial concept.

Author: I "merged" the tip with the point n°2 above:
`Export a list of objects with their names and IDs (and excluding key-value pairs by specifying an unused namespace).`

  namespace (any random input will work). This does not affect tags.

Importing annotations
---------------------

Starting from the file we exported as explained in the previous section, \
we proceed to edit it within a spreadsheet editor, adding more columns to the csv, \
including a row specifying the namespace to assign for each key:

.. figure:: images/annotation_05_KV_to_import.png

   *Result of populating the csv shown in a text editor*
..

We added several columns to annotate our dataset with Key-Value pairs \
following the `REMBI <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-021-01166-8>`_ guidelines \
(after saving the document, our ``TAB`` separator became ``,``).

We proceed and start the script "*Import from CSV*".

.. figure:: images/annotation_06_script_import.png

   *Selection of all the datasets of a project and the Import from CSV script.*
..

> There are many parameters here that could help you fine tune the way to import annotations. More \

Reviewer: Indeed, again though, I would vote for the default Target type to be an image. What if I do not want to always fine-tune (hopefully this is the case, as I want to be industrious and high-throughput). (Hard-won experience from the workshop last week :)

Reviewer: The formatting here went wrong 
![Screenshot 2024-12-11 at 12 39 08](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ab82eb1d-fd19-4422-a02d-21edb9fa3838)

  on that in the :doc:`parameter description section</parameter_description>` of this guide.

> We can then see in the OMERO activities that the Key-Value pairs were added to 5 \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Key-Value pairs were added to 5 \
```

The reader is trying to understand the concept at this stage. I would not introduce ``OMERO activities`` as not sure this is useful...

> datasets out of the 11 present in this project (as expected). We also see three set of \

Reviewer: Please reformulate. Three ``set`` ? Possibly sets...

Author: changed to `sets`

> key-value pairs, one for each namespace we used in the csv.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Key-Value pairs, one for each namespace we used in the csv.
```

I actually do not understand. The namespace usage comes as a big surprise for me. Can you introduce more slowly ?

Reviewer: (maybe bearing in mind that most of the users do not know and do not want to know about what namespace even is...)

.. figure:: images/annotation_07_KV_import_printout.png

  *The script output (5 entries in the csv matched to 5 dataset out of 11) and the\

>   resulting key-value pairs annotation.*

Reviewer: Perfect, understood, thanks.

..

Converting the Key-Value pairs namespace
----------------------------------------

Key-Value pairs are assigned a category/label (known as namespace). \
This grants flexibility so that different annotations can be \

> distinguished or isolated (like for exporting/deleting only those with a given \

Reviewer: too many brackets - not helpful for understanding (I do it too sometimes... but not very good practice :0

Author: reformulated without brackets

namespace).

   In fact, if you created Key-Value pairs in OMERO.web, you have used \
   namespaces without noticing it: OMERO assigns by default the \
   "client namespace" (``openmicroscopy.org/omero/client/mapAnnotation`` in full)\

>    , a special namespace recognized by OMERO.web allowing to edit them.

Reviewer: that does not look that great
![Screenshot 2024-12-11 at 12 57 10](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8bb3a77e-6f6b-4c12-b8bb-009b98b5cf87)

Did you want to insert a Note ? You can do it if you take the Note just above https://omero-guides.readthedocs.io/en/latest/introduction/docs/data-management.html#move-data-between-groups as an example.

> We would like to do a few changes in OMERO.web, and for that we would need to \

Reviewer: What changes in OMERO.web ? It seems like a sentence which says little with many words.

change the namespace to the default OMERO.web namespace. We indicate the namespace we \

> want to edit and leave the second field empty (default namespace is then used).

Reviewer: Sorry, you lost me on this paragraph. ``default OMERO.web namespace`` is I suspect not the correct term. Maybe this is the namespace which is used if you use webclient UI to create a KVP ?
I am afraid this paragraph needs to be more specific in wording and use less, but more targeted words.

Reviewer: Maybe that is why you are converting the namespaces in frist place, to get to the situation where you can edit them later in webclient, because they are in the ``right`` ns now ?
Please try to motivate the user better in terms of why should they use your valuable script ? Ta

.. figure:: images/annotation_08_convert_namespace.png

  *The script to convert the namespace of key-value pairs annotations.*
..

And here is our five Key-Value pairs annotations with converted namespace:

.. figure:: images/annotation_09_converted_KV.png

  *The script output (5 dataset had annotations with the default namespace) and the\
  resulting key-value pairs annotation.*
..

Deleting Key-Value pairs
------------------------

> It turns out that there are more than a few edits to do on our key-value pairs, and \

Reviewer: It seems that the first use of the deletion was obvious. 2 consecutive imports or, more notoriously, an export followed by edit and reimport, will end with a duplicated KVPs on objects (at least that was our experience during workshop). Hence, we used the deletion to ``clean up`` the KVPs just after export and then reimport.
It is dawning on me slowly that you are assuming some namespace workflow which should replace the workflow I just indicated ? I would not underestimate the adverse reaction of the user to any ``namespace`` parameter, which is almost certainly unheard/unclear to start with.

converting back and forth the namespace seems too tedious this time. Let's instead export \

> what we have so far (we have done edits that we don't want to lose), delete "old" the key-value pairs, \

Reviewer: indeed, that is what we ended up doing.

and reimport when we are done fixing them.

Using the same selection inputs for both scripts, we make sure that we have the key-value pairs on our \
computer before deleting them. Because we want to export/delete multiple namespace at once, we can use the ``*`` \

> to include all namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to include all namespaces.
```

But mainly, this ^^^ sounds scary and needs an additional sentence. Again, protect the user from the ``namespace`` term, and, also, in time where big deletions are asked for, make sure to impart sense of security by explaining slowly and properly, ta.

Because there is no undo with the deletion of data from OMERO, think twice while checking the confirmation box and clicking \

> the "Run script" button.

Reviewer: that is a good feature. It stopped us during workshop, but see above my attitude - safety first.

.. figure:: images/annotation_10_export_delete.png

  *The two scripts used one after another. Export the annotations for backup \
  before removing them from the server with the Remove KV script.*
..

> We can now edit the mistakes in the .csv file and reupload the Key-Value \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now make the necessary edits in the .csv file and reupload the Key-Value \
```

mistake is not a positive word...

(after saving the document, our ``TAB`` separator became ``,``).

We proceed and start the script "*Import from CSV*".

.. figure:: images/annotation_06_script_import.png

   *Selection of all the datasets of a project and the Import from CSV script.*
..

There are many parameters here that could help you fine tune the way to import annotations. More \
on that in the :doc:`parameter description section</parameter_description>` of this guide.

The Key-Value pairs were added to 5 datasets out of the 11 present in this project, as expected. \
We also obtain three sets of Key-Value pairs, one for each namespace used in the csv.

.. figure:: images/annotation_07_KV_import_printout.png

  *The script output (5 entries in the csv matched to 5 dataset out of 11) and the\
  resulting key-value pairs annotation.*
..

Converting the Key-Value pairs namespace
----------------------------------------

Key-Value pairs are grouped under categories called namespaces. This allows \
flexibility to distinguish or isolate annotations, such as exporting or deleting \
only those associated with a specific namespace.

.. note::

>    In fact, if you created Key-Value pairs in OMERO.web, you have used \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   When you create Key-Value pairs in OMERO.web, you use \
```

   namespaces without noticing it: OMERO assigns by default the \

>    "client namespace" (``openmicroscopy.org/omero/client/mapAnnotation`` in full)\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   "Client namespace" (``openmicroscopy.org/omero/client/mapAnnotation`` in full)\
```

Please stick to one form, either ``"Client ...."`` or ``"client ..." everywhere.

>    , a special namespace recognized by OMERO.web allowing to edit them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   , a special namespace recognized by OMERO.web.
```

You are explaining about the editing capability again just in the sentence below the note.

> The "client namespace" (see note above) is the only namespace that allows editing of \

Reviewer: Client

Key-Value pairs in the OMERO.web interface. If a Key-Value pair uses a different \

> namespace, its namespace must first be converted to the client namespace before editing. \

Reviewer: 2 occurrences of "client namespace", one occurrence of client namespace in one paragraph (compare with other occurrences of "Client namespace" elsewhere...

------------------------

It turns out that there are more than a few edits to do on our Key-Value pairs, and \
converting back and forth the Namespace seems too tedious this time. Let's instead export \
what we have so far (we have done edits that we don't want to lose), delete "old" the Key-Value pairs, \
and reimport when we are done fixing them.

Using the same selection inputs for both scripts, we make sure that we have the Key-Value pairs on our \
computer before deleting them.

.. warning::
   To export or delete multiple Namespaces simultaneously, you can use the * wildcard to include \
   all Key-Value pairs, regardless of their Namespaces. However, use this feature with caution, \
   as deleted annotations cannot be recovered without a backup.

Because there is no undo with the deletion of data from OMERO, think twice while checking the confirmation box and clicking \
the "Run script" button.

.. figure:: images/annotation_10_export_delete.png

  *The two scripts used one after another. Export the annotations for backup \
  before removing them from the server with the Remove KV script.*
..

We can now make the necessary edits in the CSV file and reupload the Key-Value \

> pairs!.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pairs!
```
